How do you feel in the face of this in writing this book?
Well, you know, I currently understand the anger.
I mean, I understood it against my brother foremost.
I mean, I had my own anger at him for what he had done.
And I also, and I understand society's anger at large.
I'm just saying.
Yeah, I do it myself all the time.
You know, these are frightening times.
Oh, yeah.
People do feel under siege.
They feel threatened.
I've experienced a lot of the same fear and damage that other people have in the last few years.
I had somebody shot the desk for my apartment building where I live here in Los Angeles.
You live out here in LA?
Yes, just about a year and a half ago.
I've been robbed many times.
When I worked at a record store, I would sell it at a nice point.
I understand it.
the anger.
I agree that there is a crisis.
I also have strong feelings about how that crisis is interpreted and perceived and reported.
It's interesting that a year ago there was no perception of a tremendous crime crisis in this country.
This comes and goes.
Issues over crime.
Crime is
It's always going to be with us.
It's a periodic issue, and there are periodic concerns or panics about it, and we're certainly going through an intense one at this point.
And I certainly think that some of that has to do with what kind of reportage we've seen, that around the time of the polyclast incident, there was
There was a good deal of reports that I think gave Americans a sense that everybody's at danger, that everybody is at risk in the society, even though some of the statistics indicated that in some ways violent crime was dropping.
But I agree there's a problem.
It has to be addressed.
because clearly it threatens all our futures.
Just to say that perhaps there's a solution to, you know, definitely kids.
All right, go ahead.
There's this fact that I think you articulated in this interview and also in the parts of the book that I have read that we should be really focusing our resources on
the early stages of... Oh, yeah.
But that's not going to happen, is it?
No, it's not.
I'm sure it's not.
But it doesn't change the truth.
But if it's a kid that I do, and I have two girls, and they're 13 and they're 11, and one of these guys is victimized, I'm furious.
Of course you are.
I want satisfaction.
I don't want an explanation of three centuries of abuse.
No, nor should you...
have to, you know, rationalize your feelings on the basis of that explanation.
I mean, if somebody killed somebody very close to me, you know, a person I love, I would have all the same thing that we all would have.
I, in turn, would want to see that person.
I have no trouble comprehending that.
I have no trouble comprehending the idea of something like the death penalty as a matter of vengeance.
rather than... You don't feel that it accomplishes anything in the long run.
No.
Your brother's purpose is as much as it is in society.
Oh, yeah, of course.
In his case, obviously.
And also, I think it accomplishes something.
I think it underscores the whole climate of violence and the whole rationality of killing.
I think what it accomplishes is
you know is in a way a deterrent i feel i do feel strongly that if you were to uh i think if you were to step up the rate of executions in this country you probably see two things happen or three things pricey and initially some some real pleasure that was happening you would um over the long run see that if they would have virtually no effect on the
the rate of violence or murder in society.
And I think in the long term, you begin to see a real dissatisfaction with that whole process and what it renders.
I mean, it is... I think that
To really counter-effect crime or to try to do something to limit its horrible impact on all of us and on this society, I think you have to look at where crime comes from.
And we are doing that.
I mean, there's a great deal of disagreement.
There are those who say where crime comes from is from the media's portrayal of crime or in terms of television or where it comes from films.
But I think that crime comes from the human heart.
Let's talk about this book, Michael.
First of all, tell me about the spelling of your name.
It's Michael.
It always looks Russian.
No, there's no Russian kin.
I was born with the spelling in the normal way and kept that spelling until I was about 14.
My mother had a good friend who had a baby that they named Michael, and that was the spelling they used.
She really liked it.
I was starting high school, and she suggested that I change the spelling.
She said, if I could change the spelling in 15 years, I would have given it to you.
Of course, when you were a kid, the idea of having any kind of singularity, any distinction, was quite exciting.
Christian name, so to speak, is M-I-C-H-E-N.
Yes, that's right.
And so it has changed.
And I just changed it to this guy.
And that's not likely to get into my piece.
I'm curious.
This book is an unusual kind of exercise, isn't it?
I mean, do you think that you would have a publisher like Dumbleday for the connection with Gary Gilmore?
No.
Probably not.
I'm realistic about that.
Pardon me for being brutal.
It's a wonderfully written book, and I'm not minimizing it in any way, but on the other hand, we all remember Gary saying, let's do it, and he gets shot, and we have this pilot shot in the heart, and so you have the occasion.
Tell me a bit about it.
That's a completely fair statement.
One of the reasons
I stayed away from the story by and large, with the exception of writing about a Rolling Stone a couple of times, was exactly for that reason.
I knew that there was a power and attraction to Gary's story, and I knew that it would be an easy thing
So I have people approach me a couple times over the years about doing more writing on it, and I just, I wouldn't even entertain.
In my own reading about you and about this book, I was prepared to dismiss you, but I find that you are akin to discourage a professional writer.
And, you know, I make my living from the pen, and this is not something that you have decided to do
to make a fast buck.
You've been doing this for a number of years.
Believe me, I wouldn't be here today if I didn't feel that you were a professional writer.
Well, thank you.
I'm glad you did.
I look you straight in the eyes as I say this, and I say, who the hell is writing this thing before I know who you are?
It's very well written, and this is why we're here.
For me, from my standpoint.
Put that on the record, it won't take much.
So, go ahead.
Well, yes, I was certainly aware.
Actually, some of it caught me by surprise.
There are stories that we have to tell.
There are stories we have to tell.
And I didn't even want to think about this story.
You must have known at some point that you would have to deal with it.
I did not until it became apparent I could no longer not deal with it.
which happened to me in a period of clinical depression where you start to examine the things that create your depression, where it comes from, and then you look at some of the historical antecedents in your own history, your own family's history, and I realized I was carrying things around that I had never known I was carrying around.
I had told myself that I had to escape my family and that I was not an heir.
At all.
And for me to discover that I was an heir was almost immobilizing.
I mean, I know that during that time I came in as close to self-destruction as I'm capable of.
Do you think if Gary hadn't have done what you've done, and this drama hadn't played itself out, that you would have still been a writer?
Yeah, I had started to be a writer.
I was writing for Rolling Stone when Gary
And I've been writing for local papers in Portland for two or three years, covering music for a couple of newspapers.
So this is a story then at some point which says, it's a roadblock, it's here.
I have to do something with it.
I wrote this because I am a writer.
It's a story.
Yeah.
We've done it with stories in our lifetimes, and we have to do it.
It's just as you said, there are stories we have to tell.
I appreciate that entirely.
If you have the ability to write, I never like writing.
In fact, I really hate doing it.
I do it every week.
I take it out of the last deadline to the last minute, but we do it.
Yes, and it's what I do.
It's all I do.
But we love it.
And it's all I'm trained to do.
It's all I can do.
I was, I, you know, I need this and this.
He thought this was my interview, too.
Yeah, I remember a very good friend named Steve Harrison who just signed a hold.
Oh, you did?
Yeah.
Steve and I went out drinking a lot.
And we'll probably do it again tonight.
He lives about a block from me.
These things do happen.
Oh, yes, yes, they do.
Alan's here, by the way.
Oh, that's right.
You mentioned his name.
Yeah.
So, yes, I, when I finally decided I had an interest in this story, I wrote a letter to him.
There's a risk here for you, by the way.
Yeah, there's a big risk.
You really want the risk of being tapped as the guy who's, as the guy who's, you know, all the other writing that you've done for 20-odd years.
Thank you.
very much you're right in fact and i will have to live with that now i i sort of chose to live with the one thing i didn't want to live with which is that i will be associated with the story i know now that i will be associated with the story more than anything else i will ever do uh and i for years i i tried to avoid that i resented that any of these things had happened in my life uh and i
and i tried to disclaim i mean you know many times over the years i'd meet people and when they would hear my name there would be the frequent comment of or you or you wouldn't be gary gilmore's brother and they always say it jokingly the same way they always say half-assed things you know if you met somebody with the last name nixon you'd say oh well you see i wouldn't do that because it is that unusual name i mean my name is a bad thing if i went on the shot
people.
You're like Hitler.
The guy's name is Hitler.
Right.
Go Hitler.
No relation, right?
There's a problem here.
Yeah, exactly.
But Gilmore is not an unusual name.
No.
And it's far enough removed in
I mean, it happened, but what is it, 17, 18 years?
13 years, yeah.
And here's the Mailer book.
How did you deal with Norman?
I dealt with him always through other people.
I dealt with him through Larry Shiller and through his assistant, Judith McNally.
I sent him a long list of questions, and he wrote some replies, and he turned over a
a lot of records he turned over uh gary's prison records extremely extremely decent grapes to both him and hillary schiller because i had not not only had i not participated in executioner's song but uh but you know i i plainly had strong strong doubt what were you trying i mean what point at what point might you decide to do this i mean just double bacon forward and say
Do you reach a point in your life when they say I had to do this?
That's pretty much it.
What happened was, as I said, I was in a period of depression where I began to realize that some of that was family stuff, and I began to think about it and talk about it a lot to friends and a good therapist.
And one friend suggested one night, as we heard having drinks, she said, this is the story you should write.
I heard it from the way you talk about it.
This is the story.
Because I had tried a couple books and had to do it.
you know, fall on my face in the process.
You said you were suffering from chronic depression, which is a pretty focused thing, right?
Do you think that your relationship to this whole situation was a bad thing in terms of depression?
I'm sure that... I think that the question that came out was...
It was something I've been carrying with me for a long time.
That wasn't the only issue.
I mean, one of the things about depression is it can reverberate back through everything in your life, a bad love affair, a lost job, bad health, so many things.
By the time you go back to all those things, the very last thing you get to might be the place where you learn depression.
In my case, it was the family.
That was the last thing I traced my depression to.
When I would get depressed, I never had anything...
to do that.
And I certainly don't think that was the sole source.
I mean, depression can come from so many different causes, including chemical imbalance.
You know, I don't want to hang at all on that.
Did you reach the William Styron case?
I read his book.
Were you suicide and this kind of stuff?
I never really considered suicide.
I know I wanted to die, but I never considered suicide.
I was really terrified of life.
And it was the kind of thing where I would sometimes
I find myself wishing a truck would just fly off the street and hit me.
That kind of thing.
No, I never thought of action.
I mean, I did think about it, but not to the point where I thought, okay, what I will do is I'll get a gun.
Whenever I would think along those lines, I would realize that I was way too close to my brother at those moments.
Whenever I would think about something like killing myself, I would realize that
that brought me too close to him.
What is the personal pain for you?
You mean of this story?
In this story?
Yeah.
I think I had to discover that over and over throughout the years.
I remember there was a period after I finished writing this, and I have to say that the night I finished it was a night I felt wonderful, even though it doesn't come to a particularly happy ending as a story.
About a month later, I sent it off to my editor, and I didn't want to look at it for a long time.
A month or two later, when I was doing sort of a preliminary copy edit or something like that, I sat down and read it.
And that was the first time I'd read it as a piece since I'd finished it.
And I got really depressed.
And I think what I realized was just, you know, living with the loss of all that mortality,
I realized through this I got to know people in my family in a way that I had never thought about before, but I didn't get to interact with them.
I mean, almost everybody in this story is dead except for my brother Frank.
And I realized when I finished that proofreading or copy editing reading, I sat myself in one night and I felt really awful.
I realized that I will never have these people again.
I never get to see them or talk to them again.
They're gone forever.
And I missed them.
And I realized I really missed my mother.
I probably missed my father at least because he died when I was fairly young, and I had a good relationship with him.
Well, apparently you didn't realize that he was a violent freshman then.
No, I had no idea.
He is.
I had no idea.
As a book which goes out now into the marketplace,
Well, what do you want these people and, you know, the vital signs are positive that this is something that's moving with the people who have read it.
What do you want the reader of America to come away with?
Well, I guess if there's any one central thing.
I mean, message.
Is there a message?
I guess there is, yeah.
It is a story.
It's a story primarily for me as a person who wrote it.
I paid attention to the story and I tried to follow the story.
And as often as I could, I tried to let incidents speak for themselves.
I tried to step in only when I felt like there were times when something particularly horrible happened and I felt like I really do have to say something here at this point.
I owe that to myself and whoever is reading this.
By and large, I tried not to comment too much on too many of the stories.
But I think the thing I came away from is
was an awareness that the violence we do to the people closest to us is a violence in some ways that never ends.
People can carry that stuff inside them.
for a long, long time.
And as in Gary's case, sometimes that violence, I mean, Gary's responsible for what he did.
There's no question.
Because you point out that he had said in prison that he was going to go to counsel for a couple of months.
That was a report I got from a man himself.
Well, yeah, that's probably pretty good.
I mean, I'm an old journalist, and I believe you.
Yeah, I believed it when this guy told me.
You know, I mean, it sounded real.
It had their dream.
Whether or not he knew that these people were Mormons or whatever, but he had a chip.
He had a monumental chip on the show.
Oh, yeah.
How are we supposed to respond to this?
Well, I don't ask anybody to respond to Gary with...
You don't seek the apprehension of Gary.
No, no, there's no way that can happen.
I mean, Gary did awful things, and he paid an awful price for them.
I haven't forgiven Gary for those things.
I have no right to.
I can't imagine the family of the people that he killed could or should forgive him, and maybe the society should not either.
But I guess the one thing that I would want people to pay attention to is
is how this happens to a person's life, how somebody grows up and becomes somebody who does such horrible things.
I don't think these things are accidental.
I don't think they're impulsive.
I don't think they just come out of some deep, genetic core of evil.
What do you suggest, though?
I mean, you do go back several hundred years, and there is a... Well, I think there's a legacy.
...a continuum here of... Yes, exactly.
A lot of that's just learned.
I mean...
Part of me does think that, yeah, we pass on unconscious things.
Just in the same way that we can inherit a physical trait of a parent, eye color, hair color, face shape.
I certainly believe we can inherit.
But we are also responsible for what we do.
I think you made it clear on that.
We are responsible for what we do.
I guess Gary was saying that himself.
I mean, you know, he did... He did...
insist on, I mean, for many, many reasons, and I don't think this was his only reason or even his primary reason, but it was at least part of the statement he made was that he accepted a responsibility and he was going to pay for that.
And he paid the ultimate price for it.
And I think he's the only firing squad execution.
I think I would be very surprised if we ever put an email to the firing squad.
But he kind of demanded that, didn't he?
Oh, yeah.
I really do believe there was, maybe not any conscious level, but kind of a romance with that fate.
You know, I mean, it was not...
It wasn't a shock or a surprise, certainly in many ways, what happened in Gary's life, the murders, the death sentence, the execution.
It was as if he'd been hitting there, and I say this many times in the book, as if he had been hitting there for a long time.
And what I realized during this work was we had also been hitting there.
My mother had a deep, deep abhorrence.
about the death penalty that went almost to the point of some kind of maddened phobia.
She was consumed at times with it.
She told those stories all the time.
I remember one thing I forgot to say in the book and I wish I had remembered.
I pointed out that my mother, the only time she ever voted was to vote for Kennedy in 1960.
But then I remembered later.
Actually, I saw a newspaper report and it reminded me that the reason she had voted was there was a referendum
on the ballot about the death penalty in Oregon.
In fact, that was the year Oregon abolished the death penalty.
And that was the whole reason she went to vote.
She felt so strongly about it.
And I think she always had a fear, a sense that was going to come along and take somebody in her life.
Now, you know, obviously, you know, Gary made all his choices.
You know, he made a lot of rotten choices every step of the way.
And I had great, great anger.
with him for that.
I think I've come to understand a little bit better about how clearly our parents can influence us in so many ways.
They can influence us to who we marry or what occupation we pursue or how smart we are or whether we go to school.
I think just as much clearly our parents can influence us.
He said somebody could end up having a rendezvous with a death penalty.
How well did you know Gary?
Not well at all.
He was never around as a kid.
He was the one brother.
What's the difference in age?
Ten years.
I think he was the one brother I longed to know the most.
When I was a kid, I really wanted Gary to like me.
I was fascinated by him.
Did you fear him at all?
I didn't fear him then.
I certainly came to.
He intrigued me.
He was always quiet.
He was always remote.
He was a terrific artist, and that was the one thing about him I remembered and was fascinated by.
I would sit and watch him draw, and I would try to get him to teach me, but he had no real interest.
He was good at it, but he had no real interest in it.
He certainly didn't want to communicate with it or share it with anybody.
He was someone who came in and out.
By the time I was four, he was already in reform school, and he was in and out a lot over the years, and more out.
From the time he was 14 and I was four, until his death when he was 36, in those 22 years, he spent roughly 20 years incarceration.
And in Oregon, when you're a kid, you cannot go visit somebody, even if they're your father, when they're in jail.
You have to be at age 18.
It has to be a real special circumstance, like an impending death or something.
Gary went to prison for his armed robbery when I was 11, I think, or 12.
And I did not have communication with him for six years.
What did you think of him all this time, even before the murders?
I think I can't have forgotten about him.
I know my mother didn't.
Did you?
Before the murders?
Yeah.
Except that he's a badass dude?
At first,
He wasn't a part of my life, so I didn't really relate to him.
I knew he was in prison.
I felt bad about it, but I also felt ashamed about it.
I didn't start to get to know him until I was a young adult.
And then an instant I relate in the book about when he got a school release, because he won an art scholarship while he was in prison at Oregon State Pantansbury, and they gave him a school release.
to go to an art school in Eugene, Oregon, so that he could study art.
And I was really happy for him.
We all were.
I'm writing for the Eugene paper, by the way.
Oh, really?
Yeah, I'd take a nice piece.
Good.
That might be a challenge.
Yeah, I probably would be.
They took him up to the school.
He was supposed to go to a halfway house every night, check in, spend the night there.
But he could go to school and have freedom on the campus.
He never even registered.
He walked off campus.
He came up to Portland, saw my mother.
He came over and saw me.
And he essentially escaped from prison.
And within a couple days, there was a warrant out for him.
He was committing robberies again.
He wanted me to buy him a gun during that period.
And I was furious with him for even asking.
So that was when I really first got to know him.
And I didn't like what I knew.
I always saw him as...
bright and capable but i saw him as incorrigible i thought how did he react how did he respond to you i think he wanted he very much wanted me to be his brother but gary wanted people always was there any warmth there was a great deal there was real love i mean that was genuine but i mean he did love me i saw it even during that time i mean he seemed to see me i could see that he was really our brother gave him his diet just a few months before
And I think he realized that he was losing his family and he had never been with them.
And I think he did want to reach out.
But he chose really a horrible way to do it.
You come to your younger brother.
You ask your younger brother to get you a gun to help him commit robberies and crimes and somebody can die as a result.
I wasn't about to do that for anybody.
And I deeply resented it.
And more than that, it gave me conviction that he could not be saved.
I thought, this is the best chance he's ever had in his life right here, and he's blown it so badly that he will never be saved.
He will always be in prison.
And I just pulled away, and I know that that hurt him.
I know that angered him.
We had an extremely difficult and bitter relationship from that point on until the last week of his life.
Describe for me your own feelings when you knew that you were going to be executed.
I was just sick to my heart.
When you got the death penalty, when you got the sentence, of course nobody had been executed.
And I tried to comfort my mother that they wouldn't start with Gary, but I think there was some part of me that knew otherwise.
And then when I heard it, he was going to...
give up his appeals and demand that the sentence go forward.
I knew right then, but I was heart sick.
I was full of rage and confusion.
What was the rage?
Deep rage against Gary for making his choice.
The rage began well before then.
When he killed those two men, I was outraged beyond belief.
I really hated it for doing that.
I could not imagine... I could not imagine doing that.
I could not imagine... I can imagine people being angry and killing somebody to serve them.
Or I can imagine somebody in the courts committing a robbery
Something goes wrong.
Right.
Something goes wrong already if you're panicking in the shoes of me.
I can't condone it, but I can imagine.
I can't imagine.
But you can certainly understand how it happens.
I understand how Gary became somebody who was dangerous and deadly, but I can never understand how he
I have an explanation, but not one that can ever go far enough to even begin to absolve it.
As I say, I understand how he became a violent person.
was sort of jammed in his heart from day one.
So let's pull it together and say, what does this book do?
I hope that this book tells something of a history of violence and its origins.
I always conceived it as a genealogy of violence and sort of tracing how violence develops.
I think of violence and... Just come on in again.
I'm sorry.
I've always thought that it's an extremely complex event.
You know, for that moment to happen where somebody kills somebody, I think there's a complexity of history that leads up to it.
And so many different things could make a difference.
So many different things.
You know, sometimes just being, watching across the street and being in the right place or the wrong place at a given time.
or had something else happen in the real life.
And that was what I wanted to do.
I wanted to examine that history.
And I know when I set out, I kept looking for those moments that would have made a difference.
And I realized, of course, there were just way too many of them.
But that was certainly part of what I wanted to understand.
I wanted to look at violence as a consequence of family history.
And do you feel that in some way this types you or casts you?
Sure, I do.
I mean, I don't feel obliged to live, according to that, Kath.
I mean, I'm going to be the person I've always been, as somebody who loves to sit at home and write about music and tinker with computers and toys.
And all my interests, whatever my literary interests are or...
uh my interest in various arts you know i i i think it will cast me yes as the person who wrote about being the brother of a killer um yes of an executed killer and uh it seemed definitely one was one who was profiled by learning mailer yes how do you separate yourself from that book by the way mailer
Well, it's quite easy always to separate myself from it in a certain way because I didn't participate on any level.
I understand that, but that might be the flip side of the story.
Well, I actually think the two books are in some ways complementing one another.
He tells that story.
What do you think of that?
I think it's a great book.
It's a long book.
A little bit, you know.
We've all been guilty of that.
My book, as I say this, my book is one of the reasons to get orphaned in a random house.
Link does not, I think, tell the whole story.
I love to write long.
I'm sure I would have gotten longer with this.
I'm glad I didn't.
I think it was about to write Link.
But I, no, I think, excuse me, I think it's actually Mayer's best book.
I mean, I haven't read it even before.
I hate it.
It's terrible.
Uh-huh.
And he's trying to do some of his reasons.
Well, we'll start talking about things, but... No, I'm sorry to ask you.
I'll tell you, reading that... There was a course that had a tremendous impact on my life with reading that book.
You're reading a story that is... In some ways, I was reading my story because I was reading about somebody I was related to and somebody who was... And I was reading about my family.
And I... And I learned things in that book that I had not learned that nobody had ever told me.
And that was...
for me, the part of the experience that stayed with me the longest.
I learned that my brother David had been stabbed in Chicago.
Nobody had ever told me that.
I thought that he died of an ulcer or an ulcerous condition, you know, made worse by his alcoholism.
I did not know that my father had had many wives before.
I knew he had a couple other children.
That's all I knew.
I had no idea he had
He has an extensive family past of his own and so many marriages.
And I knew he lived under different names, but I had no idea that my father had anything that was given in his history past.
Well, then do you believe that Gary was a particular consequence of one people?
I think in some ways.
I think, in many ways, I think Gary, if there's one real defeat for me in this book, and it's a big one,
is that I never got to know my father well enough in the research.
I could not find enough about him.
I could not solve the mysteries about him that I wanted to solve for myself.
I do think... To me, the two most elusive people in my book remain Gary and my father.
Gary will always be elusive to me in many ways.
And my father, I couldn't get... Who do you know least?
Least?
Least.
Probably my father.
I mean, I knew him well because he loved me and pretended to be good.
Whoever he was inside, I can imagine it at times, but it all feels like guesswork.
But the single greatest feeling for me was not getting his story.
I think that in many ways, Gary was sort of an echo of my father.
I think my father saw things from Gary that
that reminded him of himself a defiance i know my father certainly got tossed out of school uh a lot uh he was a defiant rebellious young man he wanted to have a criminal life before he had a family and i think that he probably saw some of gary saw some of himself in gary and i have a hunch he hated that part that he wanted he wanted to impose a strong discipline on his children he wanted to raise them in the parochial uh tradition and he wanted to uh
And he did not want anybody to defy his authority.
And I think my father was a man who was in some ways so desperate to be loved and so afraid of love that he used authority as kind of the rule for them.
Tell me what the title of the question is.
A friend suggested the title when I was young.
midway through writing a proposal, I had shown to an old girlfriend, and she, and I'm not going to, I mean, I did all the chapter titles, all that, and I was fairly happy with him, but I've never, yeah, I was looking for, I was certainly looking for things that were either a little more academic or a little more subtle, you know, and when she said, she said, you should just call it shot in the heart, and as soon as she said it, I knew that
It resonates through your whole story.
And I'm extremely grateful for that title.
It gave me a focus in some way that... Well, how does such a resonant metaphor?
I mean, it's not just an origin.
I mean, it's certainly a metaphor, isn't it?
Oh, yeah.
It's a metaphor, and it just runs very deep.
Yeah.
Well, I'll tell you, Michael, I think we've covered it.
Okay.